Journal of Human Kinetics volume 60/2017, 265-271 DOI: 10.1515/hukin-2017-0142 265
Section IV – Book Review
1 - Department of Theory of Sport and Kinesiology, Academy of Physical Education in Cracow, Poland.
2 - Department of Team Sport Games, Academy of Physical Education in Katowice, Poland.
3 - Department of Sports Theory and Technology of Sports Training, University of Physical Education in Warsaw, Faculty of
Physical Education and Sport in Biała Podlaska, Poland.
4 - Institute of Physical Education, Tourism and Physiotherapy, University in Czestochowa, Poland.
5 - Department of Athletics and Team Sport Games, University of Physical Education in Warsaw, Poland.
Authors submitted their contribution to the article to the editorial board.
Accepted for printing in the Journal of Human Kinetics vol. 60/2017 in December 2017.
Review of the textbook by W.N. Platonov:
System of athlete's preparation in Olympic sport.
General theory and practical implications
(Volume I)
by
Vladimir Lyakh1, Kazimierz Mikołajec2, Jerzy Sadowski3, Zbigniew Witkowski4
Dariusz Gierczuk3, Karol Gryko5
One of the most extended textbooks that
was published recently was written by Platonov,
who attempted to provide comprehensive insights
into various systems of athlete's preparation in
Olympic sports. The textbook is comprised of two
volumes. The first volume is composed of 8 parts
and 32 chapters. The present review is devoted to
the analysis of the material contained in the first
volume.
The fifteen-year explorations started by
Platonov in 2000 resulted in writing the study
which is of vital scientific and practical importance.
The necessity of writing this study was justified by
the authors by the following:
 significant changes in sports practice,
emergence of a number of facts that required
scientific analysis and verification, the need for
implementation of new components into
sports theory and methodology, which
emerged with extensive professionalization
and commercialization of Olympic sports;
 increasing social and political importance of
sports success in the Western countries;
 active participation of the governmental
bodies, commercial st ructures, industrial
companies and scientific centres in the
development of Olympic sports;
 changes in the policy of the International
Olympic Committee, concerning the
programme of the Ol ympic Games through
implementation of ne w sports and women's
participation in the sports which used to be
considered as men's sports;
 significant elongation of the duration of
athletic careers ranging from 20 to 30 years in
many sports, which require a more
comprehensive approach to the problems
connected with athlete's health
(the study discusses the problems of injury
rates and diseases, overreaching, overtraining
and excessive overloading to the functional
systems in the human body).
Platonov explorations have been based on
scientifically verified knowledge and information
leading to the bests sports results.
266 Review of the textbook by W.N. Platonov
Journal of Human Kinetics - volume 60/2017 http://www.johk.pl
In the chapters devoted to the problems of
adaptations of muscle tissue, bone tissue,
ligamentous tissue (ensuring energy supply for
proper muscle functioning), sports injuries and
other, Platonov used first and foremost the data of
the experts from Scandinavian countries,
Germany, Italy, USA, Canada, Spain and France. In
the material concerning preparation of the athlete,
the methodology of structuring various
components of the training process, sports
periodization and coaching aimed to reach the
highest skill level, Platonov research was based
primarily on the studies written by experts from
the Eastern European countries, supplemented
with the most recent data derived from studies
published by Western researchers.
Of several thousand publications in recent
years devoted to the analysis of the optimal
preparation of elite athl etes, Platonov chose and
analysed around 40% studies.
The substantial part of the contents of the
textbook focused on the author's finding and the
results obtained by his numerous students,
presented in 70 doctoral dissertations. Especially
interesting are the results of the studies concerning
the strategy of Olympic preparation, scientific,
methodological and orga nizational problems
connected with the training process in both
individual and team sports. This concerns the
programs which were successful during the
Olympic Games in 1976-2014.
In the first part of the textbook, composed
of two chapters, Platonov discusses the history of
the development of the general theory concerning
preparation of elite athl etes (Chapter 1) and
methodology of planning and implementation of
training based on modern scientific
accomplishments (Chapter 2). Analysis of the
systems of athletes' preparation was started by
Platonov from preparation of athletes for the
Olympic Games in ancient Greece, moving to the
second half of the 19th century, when first attempts
to organize modern knowledge in this field of
science were made. The final portion of this
discussion contains the factors which lay
foundations for the system of contemporary
knowledge about preparation of elite athletes. The
author also presented scientific centres and the
most important people from various countries
with the highest contribution to this process.
According to Platonov, from the
methodological standpoint, the theory of athletes'
preparation involves various areas and sports. It
concerns a significant amount of empirical and
practical information from various sports,
collected using various scientific methods. The
structure of the theory of athletes' preparation was
presented by Platonov in Figure 1.
The central part (core, paradigm) of the
theory is formed through construction of basic
concepts, regularities and principles which, at the
major stage of its development, were sufficiently
generalized and invariable. The core of the theory
is based on a large collection of information
included into the peripheral part , concerning a
number of facts, hypotheses, ideas, judgements,
exceptions and paradoxical phenomena in sports
theory and practice and other areas of research
(anatomy, physiology, pedagogy, genetics, sports
methodology etc.), includ ing various scientific
fields, approaches and theories (theory of
adaptation, system approach, cybernetics, theory
of functional systems et c.). As emphasized by
Platonov, knowledge related to the peripheral part
was constantly evolving, part of new ideas was
developing and adopting an important place in the
structure of the theoretical knowledge while others
were eliminated.
Using selected examples, the author
demonstrated that "any attempts to lay separate
foundations and the related principles for the
theory are counterprodu ctive and substantially
reduce the capabilities of the theory”.
In the second chapter, Platonov also
isolated 6 functions of the general theory of
athletes' preparation (descriptive, explanatory,
systematizing, predictive, critical and
methodological) and emphasized the importance
of an accurate use of the concepts and terms that
related to this area. Finally, the author analysed in
detail the contemporary system of knowledge
concerning the general theory of athletic training at
five levels (Figure 2) while revealing the
knowledge differentiation in this area (especially at
the first level).
Experts will undoubtedly find it
interesting to familiarize with Platonov's opinions
concerning the two fundamental scientific schools
of thought: Eastern and Western. The study
contains information co ncerning the competing
nature and mutual interrelations between the
preferred training system s related to Olympic
by Vladimir Lyakh et al. 267
© Editorial Committee of Journal of Human Kinetics
performance of athletes from the USSR, GDR, USA
and other countries.
At the end of Chapter 2, Platonov listed 15
objectives for improvement in the system of
athletes' preparation.
The second part of the textbook was
presented in Chapters 3 to 5.
In this part, the author presents
classification of sports with division into 6 groups
based on specific training and participation in
competitive sports. Platonov also discusses other
types of division, with their major criteria being the
content of the summer and winter Olympic
programmes and characterization of the sports on
these programmes. Histor ians of the Olympic
movement may find it interesting to familiarize
with the analysis of disciplines and events across
various sports on su mmer Olympic programmes
(1896 - 1912, 1920 – 1948, 1952 – 1980, 1984 – 2016)
and winter Olympic programmes (1992 - 2014).
In Chapter 4, Platonov describes events
and disciplines in the Olympic sport. In our
opinion, the most attractive content for experts is
the analysis of the number of competitions in
various Olympic sports (Table 1).
While referring to a number of foreign
authors (Gudger, Shaal) Platonov emphasized that
the practice of the recent decades showed that too
frequent and spontaneous participation of an
athlete in competitions made it hard to organize
optimal planning and implementation of training
plans, disturbed basic relationships and principles
and lead to overreaching and overtraining,
elevated injury risks, lack of predictive capabilities,
unsteady results, conflicts with coaches and
disappointment of friends and parents.
The experience of the recent years has
indicated that the effective preparation for major
sporting events in the year round training cycle,
assuming the achievement of the best results, is
possible only if optimal relations are maintained
between the load over the training process and the
number of starts. In various sports (except for team
sports), the optimal number of official
competitions at different levels varies from 10 to
15, with the number of days of competitions
ranging from 25 to 35 (Platonov, 2013).
Furthermore, Platonov discusses the
variants of determination of results in events
across various sports, conditions of sporting events
that have an effect on start (specific properties of
the location of the competitions, behaviour of fans,
equipment and facilities in the location,
geographical and climatic conditions, character
and type of judging, behaviour of
coaches).
The final part of Chapter 4 presents the
material concerning the role and place of
competitions within the system of preparation at
various levels of sports sk ill. Platonov listed three
approaches with respect to competitions in
contemporary sports practice. The first approach
assumes athletes' striving for frequent starts and
reaching a high level of achievement in the
competitions. The other approach adopts a low-
intensity start activity, with the substantial focus of
an athlete on preparation for the major
competitions in the competitive period. In the third
variant (approach), the numb er of competitions is
high but the participation in the competitions is
carefully adjusted. The author notes that additional
competitions are also considered as a component
of the preparation process. In such competitions,
the athlete is not expected to show a high level of
achievement and the whole "system of preparation
is oriented towards achievement of high
performance in the preliminaries and major
sporting events". In the conclusion, Platonov
discusses positive and negative aspects of each
variant (approach) and analyses the specific nature
of the start activity in team sports.
In conclusion of the first part of the review,
it should be emphasized that the reader will find
all 32 chapters of the book very interesting. The
contents represent valuab le material with great
practical implications for coaches, athletes and
research workers. The text is supported by
numerous illustrations that make the book more
attractive and easier to follow.
The review of the second volume will be
presented in a later issue of the JHK.
In Chapter 6, Platonov analyses all aspects
related to competitive activity in sport, such as
results of the competition plan, its strategy, tactics,
structure and control.
The third part of the textbook
„Fundamentals of the gen eral theory of athletes'
preparation” is composed of seven chapters.
Chapter 6 discusses the problems of athlete's body
adaptation: types of adaptation (genotypic,
phenotypic, immediate, long-term,
overadaptation, readaptation, deadaptation);
268 Review of the textbook by W.N. Platonov
Journal of Human Kinetics - volume 60/2017 http://www.johk.pl
athletic load and adaptation; versatility and
variants of adaptations in sport; functional
reserves and responses connected with
adaptation. All these aspects are explained by
Platonov considering the theory of functional
systems by Anochin and based on the
contemporary biochemical and physiological
knowledge (at the level of cells, tissues, organic
level and systematic level of the entire body).
Figure 1
Structure of the theory of athletes' preparation
Figure 2
Knowledge differentiation in the area of the general theory
of athletes' preparation at the first hierarchical level (in a separate file)
by Vladimir Lyakh et al. 269
© Editorial Committee of Journal of Human Kinetics
Table 1
Number of days of official events and single performances in
elite athletes within the annual cycle of preparation.
Sport
Number of
days of
competitions
Number of
single
performances
Sport
Number of
days of
competitions
Number of
single
performances
artistic
gymnastics 20-30 150-200 table tennis 75-80 380-420
diving 20-30 250-320 water polo 50-55 70-85
fencing 30-40 415-480 handball 70-80 70-80
high jump 35-45 120-180 freestyle
wrestling 30-40 50-70
long jump 35-45 120-180 Greco-Roman
wrestling 30-40 50-70
hammer throw 35-45 120-180 boxing 25-30 25-30
sprints (100 m
and 200 m races) 22-26 28-32 weightlifting 10-12 50-77
middle-distance
events (800 m
and 1500 m)
20-25 20-25 skiing 30-40 30-40
long-distance
events (5000 m
and 10,000 m)
15-20 15-20 biathlon 25-30 25-30
marathon race 4-6 4-6 cross-country
skiing 30-40 30-40
association
football 70-85 70-85 speed skating 40-50 40-50
* single performance - participation in a gymnastic event competition,
a fencing or wrestling match, an attempt in jumping events, a football match.
Chapter 7 of the textbook is entitled
„Human ontogenetic development and formation of
adaptations”. In this chapter, the author cites
interesting data related to periodization of human
ontogenetic development that consists in changes
occurring in the bone tissue, muscle tissue and
adipose tissue, and the nervous system in
untrained children, teenagers and young athletes.
The author discusses such problems as sensitive
periods, emphasizes scientific facts concerning the
energy pathways and changes occurring in these
systems with age and depending on sex. The
textbook also indicates how the level of recovery
capabilities and tolerance to training loads change,
to which degree work economy depends on the age
and provides information about changes in the
range of muscle strength and flexibility.
The title of Chapter 8 is „ Skeletal muscles”.
The author uses colourful figures to present the
structure of the skeletal muscles, mechanisms of
muscular contraction, changes occurring in muscle
fibres caused by the load with different magnitude
and character; coordination of work of motor units
as an important mechanism of muscle adaptation
to physical loads. He al so presents the types of
adaptive changes in bone tissue and connective
tissue caused by various factors, including physical
loads. Chapter 9 illustrates changes in the oxygen
transport system (respiratory system,
cardiovascular system, blood parameters) due to
the increasing muscle activity. Colourful figures
enhance understanding of the role of particular
systems in functional improvement of athlete’s
performance.
Chapter 10 is entitled „Energy pathways for
270 Review of the textbook by W.N. Platonov
Journal of Human Kinetics - volume 60/2017 http://www.johk.pl
ensuring muscle work ”. The author discusses
various data which are important to coaches and
athletes, related to adjustment of the level of
exercise during work with specific volume and
intensity, various psychical strain and
coordination complexity; anaerobic and aerobic
systems of energy generation in untrained people
and athletes from differen t sports: cyclic, acyclic,
speed and strength sports, team sports and combat
sports.
In Chapter 11, Platonov describes the
development of knowledge in terms of such
problems as training loads and competitive loads,
active and passive recove ry in the work-recovery
systems; specific nature of adaptive responses of
the athlete's body to any loads; the effect of loads
on the athlete's body depending on the level of
sports skill and stage of preparation; role of fatigue
and recovery process efficiency depending on the
level of fitness and skills; super-compensation and
long-time delayed training effect.
Chapter 12, „ Fundamentals of movement
control and regulation ”, contains significant
information about the role of the nervous system in
the processes of motor control and regulation. The
data presented by the author show that the
improvement in the area of motor abilities may
have an important impact on the level of special
fitness. The author refers to the findings published
by world-renowned researchers (Bersztejn,
Uhtomski, Anochin, Donskoj, Czhaidze and
others). He also presents the basic theory related to
the development of technical
skills.
The fourth part of the textbook , composed of
Chapters 13 and 14, reflects the basic aspects of
athletic preparation: goal, task, means, methods
and principles. These traditional problems of
sports training do not have to be additionally
discussed since they have been analysed in other
similar publications. What should be emphasized
is a slightly different approach of the author to
general and special prin ciples of athlete's
preparation. The first group included:
 focus on peak performance,
 advanced sport-specific training,
 consistency between general preparation and
sport-specific training,
 continuity of the training process,
 gradual increment in the level of loads until
maximal values are reached,
 proper sports periodization,
 load variants,
 cyclic preparation process,
 adequate ratio of training loads to competitive
loads.
The second group included:
 effect of lifestyles on the quality and efficiency
of the training process and competitive
performance,
 adequate integration of prevention programs
into the training process and competition
schedules.
The fifth part of the textbook is entitled
„The structure of the preparation process and stage-
based system of recruitment and orientation in sport ”.
Chapter 15 discusses long-term training,
approached as a system of knowledge, which was
formed gradually from classic Russian, Soviet and
German studies published in the 60s and 70s of the
20th century by Ozolin, Harre, Nabatnikowa and
Filin through to contem porary authors (Haff,
Wiliams, Olbrecht, Olisk).
In Chapter 16, entitled „Construction
fundamentals of long-term training programs ”,
Platonov discusses:
 optimal age for initiation of various sports,
 aptitudes for practising specific sports,
 main objectives for intensification of the
training process and importance of specific
training,

time of preparation for peak performance,
 variants of development aimed to achieve the
elite level,
 importance of competitions within a
multiannual athlete's development program,
 role of competition at individual stages of
coaching and problem of using intensive
rather than progressive training,
 dynamics of changes in basic indices of the
training process in athletes from various sports
over a four-year Olympic cycle,
 characteristics of annual program
periodization at various stages of long-term
preparation,
 effect of long-term breaks in the training
process,
 effect of the environment on training
efficiency.
Chapter 17 of the textbook, entitled
„Contemporary training periodization system ” and
by Vladimir Lyakh et al. 271
© Editorial Committee of Journal of Human Kinetics
Chapter 18 „Recruitment and orientation in the system
of multiannual preparation ” contain the material
from the previous book written by the author
("Sports training periodization"), presented in
respective Chapters 13 and 14.
The sixth part „Macrostructure of the process
of athletes' preparation ” was presented in seven
chapters.
In Chapter 19 „ Periodization of the athletes'
annual preparation. History of development”, Platonov
discusses the history of the periodization theory
and provides a brief descri ption of the concept of
periodization of the annual cycle by Matwejew and
its further development. Chapter 20 presents a
critical discussion of the views of various
researchers concerning Matwejew's theory, models
and concepts of periodization of the annual
training cycle developed by Werchoszanski,
Worobjew, Bondarczuk, Issurin, Plisk, Kremer,
Fleck, Sift, Baker, Stone, Bompa, Lambert, Mujika,
Haff and others. In Chapter 21, the author analyses
the problem of the annual cycle in the context of
long-term training programs. The chapter
discusses the most important periodization
strategy in the annual cycle with one-, two- and
three-cycle models of periodization and the
importance of competitions in the periodization of
annual preparation.
Chapter 22 presents the experiences of the
experts from GDR and USSR concerning
periodization of annual preparation, whereas
Chapter 23 attempts to explain American and
Australian experiences. Chapter 24 contains
comprehensive material concerning contemporary
models of periodization of the annual preparation
plan in selected sports, including team sports.
These models are presented by Platonov as three-,
five-, six- and seven-part constructs. The sixth part
of the book ends with Chapter 25. The title of this
chapter is " Direct preparation for competition ".
Among other things, the author discusses such
fundamental problems as training in the pre-
competitive mesocycle, pre-competitive
preparation for a single competition or direct
preparation for a series of competitions.
The seventh part of the textbook is
entitled „ Micro and mesostructure of the process of
athlete's preparation ”. In Chapter 26, the author
provides brief characteristics of modern approach
to the warm-up (structure, content, specific nature
of the warm-up before competition and other
problems). Chapter 27 explains the properties of
organization, contents and types of training units,
their structure across various sports and problems
of annual and long-term preparation. Chapter 28
illustrates the idea of microcycles and their
structure in various sports. Furthermore, Chapter
29 concerns the concept of mesocycles (types,
volume and intensity) and dynamics of training
loads, integration of microcycles into mesocycles,
specific planning of mesocycle in women's
training. The content of Chapters 17 to 29 was
discussed in details in previous publications that
have reviewed Platonov's accomplishments in
sports theory and practice (Lyakh et al., 2014, 2015,
2016).
In the eighth part of the textbook ,
Platonov discusses fundamentals of technical,
tactical and psychological preparation of elite
athletes. This part is composed of three chapters
(Chapters 30, 31 and 32). The first of them
formulates questions concerning tasks, resources
and methods of technical preparation, its stages
and differentiation due to the sports level.
Problems of technical and tactical preparation
were discussed in Chapter 31. The last chapter
(Chapter 32) explains a ll the aspects of mental
readiness and psychological preparation of
athletes; mental traits and objectives of
psychological preparation, problems of
motivation, volitional preparation; building self-
confidence, visualization training and self-talk,
perception, control over emotional distress,
overcoming anxiety and depression, tolerance for
emotional distress, control of competitive states,
efficiency of teamwork.
Corresponding author:
Kazimierz Mikołajec,
Department of Team Sport Games, Academy of Physical Education in Katowice
Mikołowska 72A, 40-065 Katowice, Poland
Phone: +48 322075236
E-mail: k.mikolajec@awf.katowice.pl