Chapter 3
Nutrition for Marathon Running
Karsten Koehler
Abstract Marathon runners can uniquely beneﬁt from nutritional strategies that
support their training responses and/or maximize their performance during the actual
race. Promising strategies during marathon training include the adequate provision
of dietary energy, macronutrients (carbohydrates, protein), and selected micronu-
trients (e.g., iron) to meet the increased requirements of prolonged distance running.
Nutritional and training approaches aimed at increasing fat oxidation rates or
facilitating weight loss may be associated with negative effects and should therefore
be conducted with care. During the actual marathon race, runners can beneﬁt from
carbohydrate loading strategies that serve to maximize pre-race muscle glycogen
storage capacity. Consumption of carbohydrates, ﬂuid, and sodium can prevent
preemptive fatigue due to nutrient depletion, and caffeine supplementation can
provide ergogenic effects during prolonged running. Because the responses to these
nutritional interventions can vary substantially among individuals and requireﬁne
tuning depending on factors such as performance level, environmental conditions,
designated running pace, propensity for gastrointestinal discomfort, and availability
of aid stations during the race, marathon runners are highly encouraged to familiarize
themselves with these strategies prior to utilizing them in a competitive setting.
Keywords Aerobic performance
/C1Sports nutrition/C1Muscle glycogen/C1Iron /C1Fat
adaptation /C1Caffeine /C1Hydration
3.1 Introduction
Nutrition is a factor of paramount importance for marathon running. Adequate
nutritional strategies can support the marathon runner in achieving their goals when
training for marathon running as well as in maximizing their performance during
K. Koehler (&)
Department of Nutrition and Health Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
Lincoln, NE 68583, USA
e-mail: kkoehler3@unl.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
C. Zinner and B. Sperlich (eds.),Marathon Running: Physiology, Psychology,
Nutrition and Training Aspects, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-29728-6_3
47
the actual race (Burke et al.2007). It is beyond the scope of this chapter to address
general nutritional guidelines for individuals who exercise, which are covered in
detail elsewhere (Rodriguez et al.2009). The purpose of this chapter is to discuss
and deﬁne speciﬁc nutritional requirements of the marathon runner and to identify
nutritional strategies that have the potential to improve marathon performance.
These include strategies to optimize the storage and utilization of energy substrates,
the prevention of fatigue secondary to nutrient depletion, and minimization of
gastrointestinal distress during prolonged running.
Due to the high load of marathon training, runners uniquely bene ﬁt from
strategies that allow them to sustain prolonged exercise at a vigorous pace and from
interventions that maximize marathon-speciﬁc training adaptations (Stellingwerff
2013). Nutritional strategies should be aligned with the goals, requirements, and
characteristics of speciﬁc training periods and consequently may vary between
general training, race-speciﬁc training, pre-race preparation periods, and speciﬁc
training interventions practiced only by a few (elite) runners, such as altitude
training or heat acclimatization (Stellingwerff2012; Burke et al.2007).
Energy production during prolonged running is almost exclusively aerobic. The
primary energy substrates utilized during marathon running are carbohydrates
(CHO) originating from intramuscular glycogen stores and plasma glucose, which
is maintained by liver glycogen as well ingested dietary CHO, and fatty acids
originating from intramuscular triglycerides and plasma free fatty acids, which are
mainly derived from adipose tissue (Spriet2007). However, the relative contribu-
tion of these metabolic fuels is largely dependent the relative exercise intensity,
which is deﬁned by the actual running pace as well as the runner’s training status:
Recreational runners who complete the marathon distance in the range of 3.5 h or
more exercise at intensities of 60–65 % of maximal oxygen uptake (VO
2max),
where fat oxidation can account for as much as 60 % of total energy production
(Romijn et al.1993). The relative contribution of fatty acid oxidation is consider-
able lower in faster recreational runners who exercise at intensities 70–75 % of
VO
2max, and elite marathon runners whoﬁnish a marathon in 2:20 (h:min) or less
rely almost exclusively on CHO, as their intensity is between 80 and 90 % of
VO
2max (Spriet 2007; Stellingwerff 2013). Because CHO storage is limited, the
depletion of muscle glycogen and plasma glucose can occur after as little as 90 min
of running, which is associated with the onset of fatigue and the need to reduce the
running pace (Rapoport2010; Jeukendrup2011). Therefore, various nutritional and
training strategies that serve to maximize the muscle glycogen storage and mini-
mize the utilization of muscle glycogen and liver-derived plasma glucose during
marathon running are associated with performance beneﬁts (Jeukendrup 2011;
Stellingwerff 2013).
Another nutritional factor that can limit prolonged running performance during
marathon training and competition is adequate hydration, particularly in environ-
mental conditions that facilitate excessiveﬂuid losses (Maughan et al.2007). This
chapter will provide a general overview of hydration strategies and discuss how
these can be integrated with other nutritional goals.
48 K. Koehler
The cumulative mechanical impact of prolonged running on the gastrointestinal
tract as well as the consumption of beverages and food while exercising is asso-
ciated with an increased risk of gastrointestinal complications (Pfeiffer et al.2012).
Nutritional strategies will be addressed that can help minimizing these complica-
tions and consequently directly impact the well-being and performance of runners.
3.2 Nutrition for Marathon Training
During general marathon training, the optimal diet provides nutrients to ensure
good overall health of the runner and to maximize the effects of marathon training.
Appropriate nutrient timing before, during, or after a workout can help to reduce
fatigue, enhance training adaptations and performance, and maximize recovery
(Rodriguez et al. 2009). Nutrients that are of particular relevance for general
marathon training include overall dietary energy, macronutrients, iron, vitamin C
and other dietary antioxidants, and nutrients that modulate immune function.
Recommendations for other nutrients, for which there is currently not sufﬁcient
scientiﬁc evidence that they are speciﬁc to marathon running, can be found else-
where (Rodriguez et al.2009).
3.2.1 Energy, Body Weight, and Body Composition
Endurance exercise, and particularly long distance running, is associated with a high
energy cost (Loucks2007). The energy cost of distance running can be estimated at
approximately 1 kcal (4.2 kJ) per km per kg body weight (1 kcal/kg/km or
4.2 kJ/kg/km), or 1.6 kcal/kg/mile (6.7 kJ/kg/mile) (Maughan and Burke2002), so
that even in recreational runners, energy requirements may be substantially higher
than in the general populations. Considering that elite marathon runners may train as
much as 150–280 km/week on 2–3 sessions per day (Burke et al.2007; Stellingwerff
2013), it is not surprising that energy requirements of marathon runners are sig-
niﬁcantly elevated when compared to their sedentary counterparts. For example,
total energy expenditure increased on average by 30 % in sedentary individuals who
underwent a 40-week training program while preparing for a half-marathon. As
such, their physical activity level, which is deﬁned as the ratio of total energy
expenditure to resting energy expenditure, increased from sedentary 1.6 to 2.1
(Westerterp et al.1992). Even greater physical activity levels of 2.3 and higher have
been measured in elite distance runners (Fudge et al.2006). It is generally recom-
mended that athletes increase their caloric intake to account for the increased energy
expenditure of exercise (Rodriguez et al.2009), but it should be considered that
energy balance is not necessarily the goal of marathon training (Loucks2004, 2007).
A low body weight and/or a low body fat percentage are beneﬁcial for marathon
running, as they assist fast and economic running and facilitate heat dissipation
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 49
(O’Connor et al.2007). Therefore, many marathon runners may intentionally limit
their caloric intake to attain or maintain a low body weight and/or a low body fat
percentage (Burke 2007). In fact, issues surrounding inadequate dietary energy
intakes are particularly prevalent in marathon running and other endurance sports
(Loucks 2004, 2007). Considerations speciﬁc for the female marathon runner, who is
at an even greater risk of not meeting her energy requirements (Loucks2007), will be
addressed elsewhere in this book, but there is increasing evidence that male
endurance athletes are also at risk of energy deﬁciency (Hagmar et al. 2013).
Negative health effects of chronic energy deﬁciency can include disrupted repro-
ductive function, reduced bone strength and quality, and impaired cardiovascular
health (Loucks et al.2011), and there is preliminary evidence that chronic energy
deﬁciency may also be associated with suboptimal endurance exercise performance
(Vanheest et al.2013). Therefore, marathon runners are advised to deﬁne realistic
goals for their body weight and body composition, which should not interfere with
other nutritional targets. Because appetite and voluntary food intake are not reliable
markers of energy requirements, athletes may need to determine the increased
energy cost of marathon training to adequately adjust their overall dietary energy
intake (Loucks 2007). Observational as well as experimental data suggests that
athletes should maintain their energy availability in the range of 30–45 kcal per kg
fat-free mass (FFM) even when attempting to lose weight in order to prevent the
suppression of metabolic and reproductive functions and to conserve bone health
(Loucks 2007). Energy availability, which is deﬁned as the difference between daily
caloric intake and the energy expended during exercise and describes the amount of
dietary energy that is available for other metabolic functions after deducting the
energy cost of exercise training, can be easily monitored by athletes and/or their
coaches, as it requires only the assessment of total dietary energy intake, exercise
expenditure, and the size of fat-free mass (Loucks2007).
3.2.2 Substrate and Macronutrient Metabolism
3.2.2.1 Carbohydrates
Because of their high training load, it is a crucial ability for the marathon runner to
quickly recover between subsequent training bouts. It is undisputed that a high dietary
CHO intake can facilitate the restoration of muscle glycogen stores between repeated
bouts of prolonged exercise as well as improve performance during subsequent
exercise bouts (Costill and Miller1980; Fallowﬁeld and Williams1993). Current
recommendations acknowledge that CHO requirements are increased during periods
of high training load, even though most studies have failed to demonstrate that a high
CHO intake during endurance training is associated with improved aerobic perfor-
mance (Sherman et al.1993; Achten et al.2004). Nevertheless, current recommen-
dations for long-distance running suggest a CHO intake of 5–7 g per kg body weight
during periods of moderate training loads and a CHO intake of 7–12 g/kg during
50 K. Koehler
high-volume periods (Burke et al.2006; Jeukendrup2011). Because dietary energy
intake may vary depending on energy balance and body weight goals, some athletes
may need to increase their CHO intake substantially to reach these recommendations
(Burke et al.2006; Loucks2007). This is particularly true for female athletes, whose
habitual energy and CHO intakes are often lower when compared to their male
counterparts (Tarnopolsky and Ruby2001). For athletes who attempt to lose weight,
it may be beneﬁcial to periodize CHO and energy intakes over the course of a
competitive season such that CHO and energy intakes are reduced during periods that
emphasize body weight and body composition goals and, conversely, CHO and
energy intakes are increased during training period that emphasize performance and
recovery (Burke et al.2004).
3.2.2.2 Fat Adaptation
Strategies that are associated with an increased oxidation of fatty acids originating
from plasma free fatty and/or intramuscular triglyceride stores will allow athletes to
conserve crucial CHO stores during long-distance running (Spriet 2007).
Well-controlled laboratory studies have shown that overall fat oxidation can
increase by as much as 30 % after several days of endurance training on an iso-
caloric diet with a low CHO (2.5 g/kg/d) and high fat content (4.6 g/kg/d) (Burke
et al.2000). This drastic increase in fat oxidation is likely due to the upregulation of
beta-oxidative pathways and muscle fatty acid transporters as well as elevated
whole body-fat oxidation (Burke and Hawley2002). The increase in fat oxidation
following several days of such a high-fat/low-CHO diet can be maintain even when
athletes restore their muscle glycogen stores by consuming a high-CHO diet for
24 h (Burke et al. 2002). However, studies have failed to demonstrate a clear
performance beneﬁt of this strategy for trained individuals (Burke and Hawley
2002). High-intensity performance capacity, which can be crucial during surges or
sprints, appears to be compromised during high-fat/low-CHO diets secondary to a
downregulation of glycolytic pathways during fat adaptation (Havemann et al.
2006), and a low CHO intake has also been linked to an increased risk of injury or
disease (Nimmo et al.2007), reduced well-being, and an impaired capacity to train
(Burke et al.2004). Therefore, fat-adaptation strategies that involve multiple days
of training on a high-fat/low-CHO diet are currently not recommended. However,
many elite marathon runners periodically conduct single training sessions in a state
of low CHO availability, which they achieve by exercising following an overnight
fast or after deliberately not restoring CHO stores after workout earlier in the day
(Stellingwerff 2013). These single training bouts on low CHO availability are
considered physiologically and psychologically challenging and likely results in an
improved capacity to oxidize fat without increasing the risk of side effects of
prolonged fat adaptation strategies, such as delayed recovery, decreased training
quality, immune stress, and impaired high-intensity exercise capacity. Elite mara-
thon runners incorporate 1–5 training sessions with low CHO availability per week
into their training regular training schedule, but it is recommended to gradually
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 51
reduce the frequency of these low CHO availability training bouts during the
preparatory training and taper periods prior to the marathon race (Stellingwerff
2013).
3.2.3 Protein Requirements
For male endurance athletes, protein requirements can be as high as 1.6 g/kg, which
is twice as high as requirements for the sedentary population. Protein requirements
for female endurance athletes are about 10–20 % lower than in male athletes, i.e.
1.3–1.45 g/kg (Tarnopolsky2004). The increased protein requirements in endur-
ance athletes reﬂect increased levels of amino acid oxidation during prolonged
aerobic exercise, which can account for as much as 5 % of the energy expenditure
of exercise (Rennie et al.2006). Protein oxidation and requirements are particularly
increased in the CHO-deﬁcient state, during high-intensity exercise, and in the
calorie-restricted state (Tarnopolsky2004). In fact, increased protein during periods
of calorie-restricted weight loss may be associated with a preservation of lean mass
(Pasiakos et al.2013). In most endurance athletes, habitual dietary protein intake is
in the range or exceeds these requirements, but some athletes may consume inad-
equate protein from their diet, particularly those who chronically restrict caloric
intake (Tarnopolsky 2004).
The co-ingestion of protein and CHO following endurance exercise (<8 h) can
enhance muscle resynthesis and stimulate muscle protein synthesis (Moore2015),
and post-exercise consumption of a supplement providing both CHO and protein
has been shown to result in improved endurance performance when compared to
placebo (Roy et al.2002). There is no evidence that the ingestion of protein in
addition to CHO during endurance exercise is beneﬁcial (Colombani et al.1999).
3.2.4 Micronutrients
3.2.4.1 Iron
Iron is an integral component of the oxygen-carrying molecules hemoglobin and
myoglobin and many cellular mechanisms. Reduced iron status is associated with
impaired exercise capacity and performance (Zourdos et al.2015), and adequate
iron stores may be particularly critical for adaptations to altitude training (Hawley
and Spargo 2007). Due to potentially low dietary iron intake as well as increased
iron requirements of endurance training, marathon runners and other endurance
athletes are a group that is particular prone to suffer from suboptimal iron status
(Zourdos et al.2015). In many endurance athletes, and particularly in female ath-
letes, dietary iron intake is below the recommendations, and dietary iron intake may
further be compromised by diets that provide only few sources of highly
52 K. Koehler
bioavailable heme iron, such as meat products, but include large amounts of
nutrients that reduce intestinal iron absorption, such as tannins (e.g., in coffee or tea)
or phytates (e.g., in legumes or grains).
In addition, prolonged running is associated with increased iron requirements
secondary to increased erythrocyte turnover and increased hemolysis and hemo-
globinuiria, which can be caused by the destruction of erythrocytes in capillaries in
the foot due to the prolonged repeated impacts of running (“foot strike hemolysis”).
Other factors for increased iron requirements in endurance athletes include
increased iron losses through gastrointestinal bleeding and sweating, as well as
altered iron metabolism secondary to the exercise-induced upregulation of hepcidin,
a protein involved in iron sequestration (Peeling et al.2008). The relative contri-
bution of these factors in the pathophysiology of iron status abnormalities in
endurance athletes remains poorly understood, but it is well documented that ath-
letes are at increased risk of low iron status when compared to their sedentary
counterparts. Whereas the prevalence of iron deﬁciency anemia, which presents the
most severe form of iron status abnormalities characterized by hemoglobin con-
centrations below the clinical range of 130 g/L in males and 120 g/L in female, is
similar among athletes and general population, the prevalence of iron depletion,
characterized by low iron storage, is signiﬁcantly increased in athletes. Among
women the risk of low iron status is further elevated due to the iron loss of
menstrual bleeding, and the prevalence of iron depletion in female athletes can be as
high as 37 %, which is approximately 1.5 times greater than in sedentary women
(Fogelholm 1995).
For endurance athletes, it is typically recommended to monitor iron status at
regular intervals of 1–2 times per year (Rodriguez et al.2009). Clinical measures of
iron status (Table3.1) include makers of iron storage, such as ferritin, markers of
cellular iron demand, such as soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR), and measures of
oxygen transport capacity (hemoglobin, hematocrit). In athletes with
iron-deﬁciency anemia, supplementation with 50–100 mg iron per day is typically
associated with improvements in aerobic capacity (Zourdos et al.2015). In athletes
with iron deﬁciency without anemia, which is typically deﬁned by serum ferritin
concentrations below 12–15 µg/L, or iron depletion, deﬁned by ferritin concen-
trations below 20–35 µg/L, iron supplementation may improve metabolic efﬁ-
ciency, endurance capacity, and endurance performance (Zourdos et al. 2015);
whereas, iron supplementation is not associated with performance bene ﬁts in
athletes with adequate iron status, as indicated by serum ferritin above >35µg/L.
A study among participants of the Zurich marathon revealed that 15 % of male
runners demonstrated serum ferritin concentrations that were indicative of iron
overload (Mettler and Zimmermann 2010). Because iron supplementation in
individuals with adequate iron status can increase the risk of side effects, such as
hematochromatosis and iron toxicity, it is critical to monitor iron status prior to
supplementation (Zourdos et al. 2015). It is further noteworthy that nutritional
interventions that increase dietary iron intake and enhance bioavailability of dietary
iron appear at least equally effective in preventing exercise-induced reductions in
iron status when compared to iron supplementation (Lyle et al.1992).
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 53
3.2.4.2 Antioxidants
The role of dietary antioxidants for marathon runners and other endurance athletes
remains only poorly understood. It is well documented that due to their increased
oxygen turnover, endurance athletes are exposed to greater levels of oxidative
stress, and that supplementation of dietary antioxidants, primarily vitamin C and
vitamin E, can attenuate measures of oxidative stress (Gomez-Cabrera et al.2015).
However, recent evidence suggests that the generation of oxidative stress per se is
not critical and in fact may trigger cellular mechanism that are required for optimal
training responses to aerobic exercise training. Because supplementation of high
doses of dietary antioxidants may have the capacity to attenuate the beneﬁcial
effects of chronic exercise training (Gomez-Cabrera et al.2015; Braakhuis 2012),
antioxidant supplementation is not recommended for marathon runners and other
endurance athletes. However, consumption of antioxidants in the range of the
recommended daily allowance from food sources should provide health beneﬁts
without impairing training responses, and should be highly encouraged in athletes
(Pingitore et al.2015; Braakhuis 2012).
Table 3.1 Stages of Iron status abnormalities, their effects on marathon-related performance, and
their prevalence in marathon runners
Stage Clinical
marker
Performance and health effectsc Prevalence
in marathon
runnersd
Low iron
storage (iron
depletion)
Serum ferritin
<20–35 µg/L
c
Unclear, but supplementation
recommended
Iron deﬁciency Serum ferritin
<15 µg/Lb
sTfR: log
(serum
ferritin) ≥4.5b
Impaired marathon performance,
immunosuppression, reduced bone
strength; reversible by
supplementation
Women:
28 %
Men: 1.6 %
Iron-deﬁciency
anemia
Hemoglobin
<120 g/L
(women)
a
Hemoglobin
<130 g/L
(men)
a
Impaired oxygen transport capacity,
reduced aerobic capacity; reversible by
supplementation
Women:
14 %
Men: <1 %
Iron overload Serum ferritin
>150 µg/L
(women)
a
Serum ferritin
>200 µg/L
(men)a
Hemochromatosis, iron toxicity Women:
4.7 %
Men: 15 %
aWorld Health Organization (2007)
bSinclair and Hinton (2005)
cZourdos et al. (2015)
dMettler and Zimmermann (2010)
54 K. Koehler
3.2.5 Training of Race Strategies
Particularly during later stages of marathon training, athletes are encouraged to
incorporate race-speciﬁc strategies into their training regimen. Strategies that may
warrant familiarization include CHO loading strategies as well as the consumption
of CHO andﬂuid under race-like conditions. These strategies will be discussed in
detail in the next section (Table3.2).
Table 3.2 Recommended nutritional strategies during marathon training
Nutrient/strategy Goal Recommended
intake
Comment
Energy Weight stability: meet
energy requirements
Weight loss: energy
deﬁcit, but prevent
negative metabolic and
health effects
Energy
Availability
f:
45 kcal/kg FFM/da
Energy
Availability:
>30 kcal/kg
FFM/d
a
Energy expenditure of
running: *1 kcal/kg/km
(1.6 kcal/kg/mile)
Carbohydrates Meet CHO requirements Moderate training
loads: 5–7 g/kg/db
High training
loads: 7–12 g/kgb
Protein Meet protein
requirements
Men: 1.6 g/kgc
Women: 1.3–
1.45 g/kgc
Sufﬁcient in most
athletes
Elevated during periods
of energy deﬁcit
Iron Prevent iron depletion
and deﬁciency
Men: 8 mg/d
d
Women (age ≤50):
18 mg/dd
Women (age >51):
8 mg/d
d
Highly bioavailable iron
(heme iron); facilitate
iron absorption (vitamin
C)
Monitor iron status 1–2
times/year
Fat adaptation Single training sessions in
low glycogen state
1. Overnight fasted,
exercise directly
after waking, no
food
2. Limited CHO
intake after ﬁrst
session of the day
Consume normal
CHO following
session
e
1–5 times per week,
reduce frequency closer
to raceaLoucks et al. (2011)
bBurke (2007)
cTarnopolsky (2004)
dFood and Nutrition Board (2015)
eStellingwerff (2012)
fEnergy Availability = Dietary Energy Intake− Exercise Energy Expenditure
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 55
3.3 Nutrition for the Marathon Race
Nutritional strategies before and during the race that provide nutrients at the right
time can help to delay the onset of fatigue. Because of the paramount importance of
CHO as metabolic fuel for marathon running (Spriet 2007), interventions that
maximize muscle glycogen stores prior to the race and approaches during the race
that minimize the breakdown of muscle glycogen and liver-derived plasma glucose
are the most promising strategies to improve marathon performance. Well-being
and marathon performance can further be improve through the consumption ofﬂuid
and minerals for the prevention of dehydration and the use of supplements with
ergogenic effects.
3.3.1 Carbohydrate Loading
During running events with a distance of 30 km and greater, fatigue is typically
caused by the depletion of muscle glycogen stores and/or hypoglycemia (Burke
2007; Jeukendrup 2011), and is well established that fatigue can be delayed sub-
stantially when muscle glycogen stores are increased (Rapoport 2010). Even
though to this date noﬁeld studies have explicitly been conducted over the full
marathon distance, it is unequivocally accepted that marathon runners uniquely
beneﬁt from maximized muscle glycogen storage (Burke2007). Studies conducted
in the 1960s and 1970s established a classical model of muscle glycogen super-
compensation, according to which a 3- or 4-day phase of prolonged exercise with a
very low dietary CHO intake (≤15 % of dietary energy from CHO), which served
to fully deplete muscle glycogen stores, followed by a 3–4 day loading phase with
minimal exercise and very a high CHO intake (≥70 % of dietary energy from
CHO), doubled muscle glycogen stores (Karlsson and Saltin1971). As such, this
strategy allowed runners to maintain their designated pace for a longer duration and
improved 30-km running performance (Karlsson and Saltin1971; Williams et al.
1992). However, these early studies also revealed potential side effects associated
with glycogen supercompensation strategies, which included fatigue and difﬁculties
to maintain the high training load required to fully deplete muscle glycogen as well
as gastrointestinal distress secondary to the drastic change in dietary CHO intake
between the depletion and loading phase (Burke2007). Follow-up studies showed
that a similar increase in muscle glycogen could be attained when the CHO intake
during the initial depletion phase was maintained at normal levels (50 %) while
runners exercised to deplete their muscle glycogen stores (Sherman et al.1981).
Recent experiments have shown that as little as 24 h of carbohydrate loading are
sufﬁcient to maximize muscle glycogen storage when athletes consume a diet with
very high CHO content of 10 g/kg or more (Sedlock2008). Most but not all data
further suggest that slightly higher muscle glycogen levels can be attained when
CHO loading occurs after the depletion of glycogen stores through prolonged
56 K. Koehler
low-intensity or short, high-intensity exercise due to increased rates of glucose
transport and glycogen synthesis in the glycogen-depleted state. Elevated muscle
glycogen levels can be maintained for 3–5 days when refraining from prolonged
exercise (Sedlock 2008).
Even though several carbohydrate loading strategies exist, all seem to result in a
similar increase in muscle glycogen storage, which is unarguably effective in
improving the ability to sustain prolonged endurance exercise (Jeukendrup2011).
For endurance events lasting 90 min or longer, successful CHO loading can
improve performance by as much as 2–3 % (Jeukendrup 2011), even though
individual performance effects may vary substantially among individuals (Sedlock
2008).
The amount of CHO consumed during CHO loading is crucial for the success of
CHO loading and should be in the range of 10–12 g/kg/day; whereas the type and
source of dietary CHO do not seem to impact the capacity to store muscle glycogen
(Sedlock 2008). Nevertheless, foods with a high CHO content may be required for
athletes to consume the recommended amounts of CHO, and foods with a high
glycemic index have been utilized in situations when the time for CHO loading is
limited (Sedlock 2008). Despite earlier reports, it has been shown that female
athletes exhibit a similar capacity to increase their muscle glycogen stores when
compared to their male counterparts. However dietary intake must be adjusted to
meet the CHO and energy needs of CHO loading, which may require female
athletes, whose energy and CHO intake is habitually lower than that of male
athletes, to drastically increase their dietary intake (Tarnopolsky and Ruby2001).
Studies of dietary practices of marathon runners suggest that even though most
athletes self-report the consumption of a high CHO diet prior to a race, actual
pre-race CHO intake may be substantially lower than recommended. Thisﬁnding
has been attributed to nutritional naivety as well as conscious attempts to avoid
CHO-rich foods (Burke and Read1987).
Because glycogen storage is associated with water retention, maximized CHO
storage is typically associated with a weight gain of typically 1–2 kg (Jeukendrup
2011). For most athletes, the beneﬁts of increased muscle glycogen storage will
outweigh side effects, but some athletes may be opposed to gaining weight.
Because most CHO loading strategies require substantial changes in the diet and as
such can be associated with gastrointestinal distress, athletes should be encouraged
to include their preferred CHO loading strategies into their training regimen as to
test them prior to the actual marathon race.
3.3.1.1 Pre-race Diet
During theﬁnal hours before a marathon, athletes should consume primarily easily
digestible foods in order to minimize the stress on the digestive system. Theories that
the ingestion of CHO shortly before exercise could be associated with performance
detriments secondary to insulin-induced hypoglycemia and subsequent performance
detriments are not only unfounded (Jeukendrup2011). In fact, CHO ingestion as
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 57
close as 5–15 min prior to exercising has been shown to evoke similar beneﬁcial
metabolic effects as the ingestion of CHO during exercise (Jeukendrup2011).
3.3.2 Maintaining High Rates of CHO Oxidation During
the Marathon
The beneﬁcial effects of CHO ingestion during prolonged running have been
known since the 1920s. CHO can improve performance during prolonged running
through central effects as well as metabolic effects, which include the preservation
of muscle glycogen, the provision of additional fuels, and the prevention of
hypoglycemia (Tsintzas and Williams 1998; Carter et al. 2004; Millard-Stafford
et al. 1997; Tsintzas et al.1996). The effects of CHO ingestion on aerobic per-
formance are dose-dependent, and performance beneﬁts are maximized at CHO
intake rates of 60–80 g/h (Stellingwerff 2013; Jeukendrup 2011). However, the
utilization of exogenous CHO as metabolic fuel is limited by the ability to absorb
CHO in the small intestine, and marathon runners should carefully choose CHO
sources that allow them to maximize the potential of CHO ingestion. When CHO
are consumed from a single source, such as glucose or glucose polymers (e.g.
maltodextrin), exogenous CHO oxidation is limited by the saturation of intestinal
glucose transporters (SGLT-1), which occurs at around 60 g/h during exercise
(Baker and Jeukendrup2014). However, the addition of fructose, which is absorbed
using alternate intestinal transporters (GLUT-1), can increase exogenous CHO
oxidation to approximately 90 g/h (Baker and Jeukendrup2014). Because high
CHO oxidation rates have been reported following the administration ofﬂuids, bars,
and gels (Jeukendrup 2011), it seems likely that exogenous CHO oxidation is
independent of the form of CHO administration. Limitations in intestinal CHO
absorption and oxidation appear to be independent of body size. Consequently, the
beneﬁts of CHO supplementation may be even greater in smaller and lighter
marathon runners, who are may be able to oxidize similar amounts of exogenous
CHO when compared bigger and heavier athletes (Stellingwerff2013). On the other
hand, slower runners, in whom CHO oxidation is lower due to the lower rate of
energy expenditure as well as a lower contribution of CHO oxidation to total energy
expenditure, may not require as much as 60–90 g/h of exogenous CHO while
running a marathon. Athletes are strongly encouraged to adjust their CHO intake
strategies to match CHO oxidation rates at their designated race pace.
3.3.3 Hydration
Depending on environmental conditions, hydration can become a performance-
limiting factor during marathon running. Documentedﬂuid loss during marathon
running and similar distance running events is typically in the range of 0.7–1.8 L/h,
58 K. Koehler
but may be as high as 3.7 L/h in some individuals (Cheuvront and Haymes2001).
Athletes are generally advised to start exercising in a euhydrated state, which can be
achieved through ingesting sufﬁcient ﬂuid (5–7 mL/kg) approximately 4 h before
competition and subsequent monitoring of the urinary response (Sawka et al.2007).
While exercising, it is recommended to consume adequateﬂuid in order to maintain
the level of dehydration below 2 % of body weight (Sawka et al.2007; Maughan
and Shirreffs 2008). If dehydration is expected to be greater due to severe envi-
ronmental conditions and/or limited ﬂuid availability during the race, hyperhy-
dration strategies may be warranted. Hyperhydration can be achieved through
consumption of excessﬂuid and the addition of sodium to retainﬂuid and prevent
increased urination (Shirreffs et al.2004). Athletes are strongly advised to refrain
from prohibited hyperhydrating substances, such as glycerol (World Anti-Doping
Agency 2015). Even though endurance performance capacity can be negatively
impacted by dehydration by as little as 2 % of body weight, it has been repeatedly
reported that faster marathon runners tend to consume lessﬂuid and attain greater
levels of dehydration when compared to slower runners (Zouhal et al. 2011).
However, it remains unclear if these ﬁndings suggest that mild dehydration is
associated with a performance beneﬁt or that faster and better-trained runners have
a greater tolerance for dehydration. Because ﬂuid losses can vary considerable
among individuals and are strongly dependent on both individual and environ-
mental factors, athletes are advised to determine their individualﬂuid loss, and
consequently their requirements, under race-like conditions. Exercise-associated
ﬂuid losses can easily be determined by assessing changes in body weight over the
course of an exercise bout (Sawka et al.2007).
Over-consumption of ﬂuid may result in dilutional hyponatremia, which is
associated with moderate side effects, such as confusion, weakness, and fainting
(plasma Na
+ <130 mmol/L), and severe side effects, including seizures, coma, and
death (plasma Na+ <126 mmol/L). In most marathon runners, hyponatremia is
asymptomatic, but it can become severe in a small proportion of athletes (Kipps
et al. 2011), and has been linked to several fatalities during marathon races.
Hyponatremia can be prevented by avoiding excessiveﬂuid intake and by atten-
uating sodium depletion in runners who excrete salty sweat (Montain et al.2006),
which can be reached through sodium consumption of approximately 450 mg/h
from sports beverages or the addition of salt to water and other beverages
(Murray 2007).
3.3.4 Gastrointestinal Distress
Between 10 and 95 % of marathon runners experience gastrointestinal distress
during prolonged running (Jeukendrup 2011). Most runners report only mild
symptoms, such as nausea and dizziness, but more severe complications such as
stomach and intestinal cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea, may occur in a small pro-
portion of runners and can impair marathon performance substantially (Pfeiffer
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 59
et al.2012). Gastrointestinal distress occurs more frequently during running when
compared to other endurance exercise modes and its incidence increases with
exercise duration (Peters et al. 1999). Dietary factors that have been linked to
gastrointestinal distress include the consumption of highly concentrated sports
drinks and particularly highly concentrated CHO and/or large amounts of CHO that
may exceed the intestinal CHO absorption capacity (Sareban et al.2015; Pfeiffer
et al.2009; Rehrer et al.1992). Because the gastrointestinal CHO tolerance varies
considerably among individuals and may adapt to chronically high CHO exposure,
marathon runners are encouraged to determine their individual tolerable rate of
CHO consumption (Jeukendrup 2011). Other dietary risk factors associated with
gastrointestinal distress include the consumption of fat, ﬁber, or protein while
exercising (Peters et al.1999). Because none of these nutrients are essential for
marathon running, athletes should be discouraged from products that contain sig-
niﬁcant amounts of fat,ﬁbers, or protein during the race. There is limited evidence
that gastrointestinal distress could be linked to insufﬁcient ﬂuid consumption and
dehydration during prolonged running (Stuempﬂe et al.2013), so thatﬂuid con-
sumption, particularly early during the race, may reduce the risk of gastrointestinal
distress. Vitamin E has been linked to the prevention of intestinal ischemia during
prolonged exercise (Buchman et al.1999), but there is no evidence that vitamin E
supplementation could reduce gastrointestinal distress during marathon running.
3.3.5 Supplements
Despite an ever-growing market for sport supplements, compelling scientiﬁc evi-
dence for an ergogenic effect exists for only a few substances. Caffeine, when
consumed at doses of 3–6 mg/kg, improves aerobic endurance performance (Burke
2008) so that caffeine can have ergogenic effects for marathon runners. Caffeine has
a half-life of 3–5 h and should be consumed approximately 1 h prior to the race.
Slower runners may beneﬁt from additional caffeine consumption (1 mg/kg) after
approximately 2 h into the race. Even when caffeine is consumed at later stages
during the race, performance beneﬁts are still likely to occur (Burke2008). Side
effects of caffeine exist and include insomnia, tachycardia, headache, and nausea.
The effects of caffeine on exercise performance are not altered by habituation or
withdrawal (Van Soeren and Graham1998), and the use of caffeine is currently not
banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency (2015).
A novel group of supplements that may be of interest for marathon runners are
dietary sources of nitrates, which can increase metabolic efﬁciency during sub-
maximal exercise via generation of nitric oxide. As such, acute supplementation of
nitrate or consumption of nitrate-rich beetroot juice of can reduce oxygen demand
and increase running economy during prolonged exercise (Barnes and Kilding
2015). However, it remains to be determined whether these effects translated into
meaningful improvements in aerobic performance, and consequently, in marathon
performance (Table 3.3).
60 K. Koehler
3.3.6 Practical Recommendations
During the marathon race, athletes typically have access to aid stations, whereﬂuid
(e.g., water and sports drinks) and food (e.g. bars, gels, and bananas) are provided.
Based on availability, preference, and needs, some athletes may consider carrying
small amounts of food and/orﬂuid in pockets or attached to belts. Elite runners
typically have access to reserved aid stations so that they can consume customized
drinks and foods during the race without having to carry these items.
The use of sport drinks is beneﬁcial because they provideﬂuid as well as CHO
and electrolytes, which both facilitateﬂuid uptake. The CHO concentration of a
drink can be tailored such that bothﬂuid and CHO requirements are met. CHO
concentrations should be in the range of 4–8 % (40–80 g per L) in order to avoid
delayed gastric emptying as well as gastrointestinal complications, both factors that
are more likely to occur when CHO concentrations exceed 8 % (80 g per L) (Baker
and Jeukendrup 2014). If needed, additional CHO can be supplied through sport
Table 3.3 Recommended nutritional strategies for race preparation and during the marathon race
Nutrient/Strategy Goal Recommended
intake
Comment
Race preparation
Carbohydrate
loading
Maximize
intramuscular
glycogen
stores
10–12 g/kg/d,
1–3 d prior to
race
a
High glycemic
index if limited
to 1 db
Exercise to deplete glycogen stores
prior to loading may increase
effects; Little or no exercise during
loading
Hydration Begin race in
euhydrated
state
5–7 mL/kg, 4 h
prior to
exercise
c
Test urine response
Caffeine Ergogenic
effects
3–6 mg/kg, 1 h
prior to raced
Side effects possible
During the race
Carbohydrates Maximize
exogenous
CHO
oxidation
60–90 g/h
e For >60 g/h: multiple CHO sources
(e.g. glucose + fructose (2:1))
Hydration Maintain
dehydration
<2 %
Fluid intake
should match
sweat loss
Considerable individual variation,
dependent on environmental
conditions
Sodium Prevent
hyponatremia
450 mg/h
f
aBurke et al. (2007)
bSedlock (2008)
cSawka et al. (2007)
dBurke (2008)
eBaker and Jeukendrup (2014)
fMurray (2007)
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 61
gels, sport bars, or confectionary. Athletes are highly encouraged to incorporate
their individual race strategies in their marathon training in order to familiarize
themselves with the strategies and reﬁne and adjust them based on individual needs
and preference.
It is well documented that most athletes consume notably less CHO andﬂuid
than recommended while competing in long-distance running events. Further,
habitual CHO intake is typically lower during running when compared to other
endurance events (Pfeiffer et al.2012). Factors that may be associated with the
limited ad libitum intake of CHO andﬂuid include individual habits, nutritional
beliefs and practices, difﬁculties to consume large amounts ofﬂuid while running,
the need to slow down at aid stations, and the emergence of sport gels, which allow
runners to consume CHO with lessﬂuid.
3.4 Nutrition After the Marathon
Only very limited research is available how nutritional strategies may affect the
recovery from marathon running. The main nutritional goals after marathon com-
pletion involve facilitation of the recovery ofﬂuid and glycogen stores and pro-
viding nutrients to support recovery and repair mechanisms and immune function.
Depending on the level of dehydration attained during the race, adequate
rehydration may be the most signiﬁcant nutritional strategy following marathon
running. The goal of rehydration is to regainﬂuid balance, and the effectiveness of
rehydration is dependent on the amount ofﬂuid consumed as well as the electrolyte
content, primarily that of sodium. Effective rehydration can only be attained if the
amount ofﬂuid consumed covers both theﬂuid loss that occurred during the race
(mainly in form of sweat) and additionalﬂuid losses that occur in response to
ingesting ﬂuid (primarily in form of urine). As such, it is recommended to consume
at least 1.5 times theﬂuid volume that was lost during exercise (Maughan et al.
1997). A higher sodium concentration will replace sodium sweat losses and retain
ﬂuid by reducing urinary output. Therefore, a sodium concentration of 50 –
60 mmol/L (1.1–1.4 g/L) is considered beneﬁcial with regards to the effectiveness
of rehydration when compared to a lower sodium concentration (20–25 mmol/L;
0.5–0.6 g/L) (Maughan et al.1997).
Repletion of muscle glycogen stores typically occurs within 24–48 h when
adequate CHO (7–10 g/kg) are consumed (Burke et al.2004). Because glycogen
synthesis is impaired in damaged muscleﬁbers (Costill et al.1988), more CHO may
be needed to restore muscle glycogen levels. However, in contrast to other events
where athletes may have to compete again shortly after the race, fast glycogen
repletion recovery should not be a high priority for marathon runners (Burke et al.
2004). Co-ingestion of protein along with may be beneﬁcial for glycogen resyn-
thesis and may provide additional amino acids for post-exercise protein synthesis.
However, it remains unknown if these strategies actually translate into improved
recovery and/or improved performance during subsequent marathon races.
62 K. Koehler
Marathon running and other prolonged endurance exercise is associated with an
increased risk of upper respiratory tract infections (URTI). Even though the patho-
physiology of URTI is not fully understood, it has been hypothesized that prolonged
heavy exertion is associated with an acute suppression of immune function
(Akerström and Pedersen2007). Whereas results from a meta-analysis suggest that
supplementation of vitamin C may be associated with a reduction in infection rates in
populations who are exposed to severe exercise (Akerström and Pedersen2007),
prospective studies have failed to demonstrate the capacity of vitamin C supple-
mentation to attenuate the immune response to prolonged running (Peters et al.
2001). Supplementation of glutamine, an amino acid that is essential for lymphocyte
proliferation, has been associated with reduced infection rates following marathon
and ultramarathon running in one study (Castell and Newsholme1997). However,
subsequent trials have failed to conﬁrm these effects. For other supplements,
including colostrum, which contains bovine immunoglobulins, there is no scientiﬁc
evidence the infection risk following prolonged exerting exercise such as marathon
running can be reduced by supplementation (Akerström and Pedersen2007).
Alcohol consumption following strenuous exercise may impair muscle glycogen
synthesis and can negatively impact the post-exercise inﬂammatory response. More
importantly, alcohol consumption may interfere with other recovery strategies
(Vella and Cameron-Smith 2010). Therefore, athletes are encouraged to refrain
from excessive alcohol consumption following the race and focus their attention on
nutritional and hydration strategies that are effective in supporting post-marathon
recovery.
3.5 Summary
Promising nutritional strategies that can be beneﬁcial for marathon runners include
provision of adequate energy, carbohydrates, and protein, to address the increased
nutrient requirements of marathon training. Prolonged training in a state of low
carbohydrate or energy availability can be associated with negative health and
performance effects and should therefore be avoided by marathon runners. Both
nutritional and exercise-related factors explain why marathon runners are at par-
ticular risk of inadequate iron status. The importance of carbohydrates for marathon
performance is highlighted by the fact that pre-race strategies aimed at maximizing
muscle glycogen storage as well as the administration of additional carbohydrates
during the race are highly likely to improve marathon performance. Adequate
provision of ﬂuid and sodium is particularly important in conditions when dehy-
dration and/or sodium losses may limit performance or impact health negatively.
Among the many supplements available for marathon runners, clear scientiﬁc
evidence for a performance beneﬁt is only available for caffeine. Incorporating
these strategies into their training routine will allow marathon runners to become
familiarized with these strategies and test their individual responsiveness prior to
the actual race.
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 63
References
Achten J, Halson SL, Moseley L, Rayson MP, Casey A, Jeukendrup AE (2004) Higher dietary
carbohydrate content during intensiﬁed running training results in better maintenance of
performance and mood state. J Appl Physiol 96:1331–1340 (1985)
Akerström TC, Pedersen BK (2007) Strategies to enhance immune function for marathon runners:
what can be done? Sports Med 37:416–419
Baker LB, Jeukendrup AE (2014) Optimal composition ofﬂuid-replacement beverages. Compr
Physiol 4:575–620
Barnes KR, Kilding AE (2015) Strategies to improve running economy. Sports Med 45:37–56
Braakhuis AJ (2012) Effect of vitamin C supplements on physical performance. Curr Sports Med
Rep 11:180–184
Buchman AL, Killip D, Ou CN, Rognerud CL, Pownall H, Dennis K, Dunn JK (1999) Short-term
vitamin E supplementation before marathon running: a placebo-controlled trial. Nutrition
15:278–283
Burke LM (2007) Nutrition strategies for the marathon: fuel for training and racing. Sports Med
37:344–347
Burke LM (2008) Caffeine and sports performance. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 33:1319–1334
Burke LM, Angus DJ, Cox GR, Cummings NK, Febbraio MA, Gawthorn K, Hawley JA,
Minehan M, Martin DT, Hargreaves M (2000) Effect of fat adaptation and carbohydrate
restoration on metabolism and performance during prolonged cycling. J Appl Physiol 89:2413–
2421 (1985)
Burke LM, Hawley JA (2002) Effects of short-term fat adaptation on metabolism and performance
of prolonged exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 34:1492–1498
Burke LM, Hawley JA, Angus DJ, Cox GR, Clark SA, Cummings NK, Desbrow B, Hargreaves M
(2002) Adaptations to short-term high-fat diet persist during exercise despite high carbohydrate
availability. Med Sci Sports Exerc 34:83–91
Burke LM, Kiens B, Ivy JL (2004) Carbohydrates and fat for training and recovery. J Sports Sci
22:15–30
Burke LM, Loucks AB, Broad N (2006) Energy and carbohydrate for training and recovery.
J Sports Sci 24:675–685
Burke LM, Millet G, Tarnopolsky MA, International Association of Athletics Federations (2007)
Nutrition for distance events. J Sports Sci 25(Suppl 1):S29–S38
Burke LM, Read RS (1987) A study of carbohydrate loading techniques used by marathon
runners. Can J Sport Sci 12:6–10
Carter JM, Jeukendrup AE, Jones DA (2004) The effect of carbohydrate mouth rinse on 1-h cycle
time trial performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 36:2107–2111
Castell LM, Newsholme EA (1997) The effects of oral glutamine supplementation on athletes after
prolonged, exhaustive exercise. Nutrition 13:738–742
Cheuvront SN, Haymes EM (2001) Thermoregulation and marathon running: biological and
environmental inﬂuences. Sports Med 31:743–762
Colombani PC, Kovacs E, Frey-Rindova P, Frey W, Langhans W, Arnold M, Wenk C (1999)
Metabolic effects of a protein-supplemented carbohydrate drink in marathon runners. Int J
Sport Nutr 9:181–201
Costill DL, Miller J (1980) Nutrition for endurance sport: carbohydrate andﬂuid balance. Int J
Sports Med 1:2–14
Costill DL, Pearson DR, Fink WJ (1988) Impaired muscle glycogen storage after muscle biopsy.
J Appl Physiol 64:2245–2248 (1985)
Fallowﬁeld JL, Williams C (1993) Carbohydrate intake and recovery from prolonged exercise.
Int J Sport Nutr 3:150–
164
Fogelholm M (1995) Indicators of vitamin and mineral status in athletes’ blood: a review. Int J
Sport Nutr 5:267–284
64 K. Koehler
Food and Nutrition Board, IOM, National Academies (2015) Dietary reference intakes (DRIs):
recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes, elements (Online). Available:http://
www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/DRI/DRI_Tables/recommended_intakes_individuals.pdf. Accessed
November 2015
Fudge BW, Westerterp KR, Kiplamai FK, Onywera VO, Boit MK, Kayser B, Pitsiladis YP (2006)
Evidence of negative energy balance using doubly labelled water in elite Kenyan endurance
runners prior to competition. Br J Nutr 95:59–66
Gomez-Cabrera MC, Salvador-Pascual A, Cabo H, Ferrando B, Viña J (2015) Redox modulation
of mitochondriogenesis in exercise. Does antioxidant supplementation blunt the beneﬁts of
exercise training? Free Radic Biol Med 86:37–46
Hagmar M, Berglund B, Brismar K, Hirschberg AL (2013) Body composition and endocrine
proﬁle of male olympic athletes striving for leanness. Clin J Sport Med: Ofﬁcial J Can Acad
Sport Med 23:197–201
Havemann L, West SJ, Goedecke JH, Macdonald IA, St Clair Gibson A, Noakes TD, Lambert EV
(2006) Fat adaptation followed by carbohydrate loading compromises high-intensity sprint
performance. J Appl Physiol 100:194–202 (1985)
Hawley JA, Spargo FJ (2007) Metabolic adaptations to marathon training and racing. Sports Med
37:328–331
Jeukendrup AE (2011) Nutrition for endurance sports: marathon, triathlon, and road cycling.
J Sports Sci 29(Suppl 1):S91–S99
Karlsson J, Saltin B (1971) Diet, muscle glycogen, and endurance performance. J Appl Physiol
31:203–206
Kipps C, Sharma S, Pedoe DT (2011) The incidence of exercise-associated hyponatraemia in the
London marathon. Br J Sports Med 45:14–19
Loucks AB (2004) Energy balance and body composition in sports and exercise. J Sports Sci
22:1–14
Loucks AB (2007) Low energy availability in the marathon and other endurance sports. Sports
Med 37:348–352
Loucks AB, Kiens B, Wright HH (2011) Energy availability in athletes. J Sports Sci 29(Suppl 1):
S7–S15
Lyle RM, Weaver CM, Sedlock DA, Rajaram S, Martin B, Melby CL (1992) Iron status in
exercising women: the effect of oral iron therapy vs increased consumption of muscle foods.
Am J Clin Nutr 56:1049–1055
Maughan RJ, Burke L (2002) Sports nutrition. Blackwell Science, Malden
Maughan RJ, Leiper JB, Shirreffs SM (1997) Factors inﬂuencing the restoration of ﬂuid and
electrolyte balance after exercise in the heat. Br J Sports Med 31:175–182
Maughan RJ, Shirreffs SM (2008) Development of individual hydration strategies for athletes. Int J
Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 18:457–472
Maughan RJ, Watson P, Shirreffs SM (2007) Heat and cold: what does the environment do to the
marathon runner? Sports Med 37:396–399
Mettler S, Zimmermann MB (2010) Iron excess in recreational marathon runners. Eur J Clin Nutr
64:490–494
Millard-Stafford M, Rosskopf LB, Snow TK, Hinson BT (1997) Water versus
carbohydrate-electrolyte ingestion before and during a 15-km run in the heat. Int J Sport
Nutr 7:26–38
Montain SJ, Cheuvront SN, Sawka MN (2006) Exercise associated hyponatraemia: quantitative
analysis to understand the aetiology. Br J Sports Med 40:98–105 (discussion 98–105)
Moore DR (2015) Nutrition to support recovery from endurance exercise: optimal carbohydrate
and protein replacement. Curr Sports Med Rep 14:294–
300
Murray B (2007) The role of salt and glucose replacement drinks in the marathon. Sports Med
37:358–360
Nimmo MA, Ekblom B (2007) Fatigue and illness in athletes. J Sports Sci 25(Suppl 1):S93–S102
O’Connor H, Olds T, Maughan RJ (2007) Physique and performance for track andﬁeld events.
J Sports Sci 25(Suppl 1):S49–S60
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 65
Pasiakos SM, Cao JJ, Margolis LM, Sauter ER, Whigham LD, McClung JP, Rood JC,
Carbone JW, Combs GF, Young AJ (2013) Effects of high-protein diets on fat-free mass and
muscle protein synthesis following weight loss: a randomized controlled trial. FASEB J
27:3837–3847
Peeling P, Dawson B, Goodman C, Landers G, Trinder D (2008) Athletic induced iron deﬁciency:
new insights into the role of inﬂammation, cytokines and hormones. Eur J Appl Physiol
103:381–391
Peters EM, Anderson R, Nieman DC, Fickl H, Jogessar V (2001) Vitamin C supplementation
attenuates the increases in circulating cortisol, adrenaline and anti-inﬂammatory polypeptides
following ultramarathon running. Int J Sports Med 22:537–543
Peters HP, Bos M, Seebregts L, Akkermans LM, Van Berge Henegouwen GP, BOL E,
Mosterd WL, De Vries WR (1999) Gastrointestinal symptoms in long-distance runners,
cyclists, and triathletes: prevalence, medication, and etiology. Am J Gastroenterol
94:1570–1581
Pfeiffer B, Cotterill A, Grathwohl D, Stellingwerff T, Jeukendrup AE (2009) The effect of
carbohydrate gels on gastrointestinal tolerance during a 16-km run. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc
Metab 19:485–503
Pfeiffer B, Stellingwerff T, Hodgson AB, Randell R, Pöttgen K, Res P, Jeukendrup AE (2012)
Nutritional intake and gastrointestinal problems during competitive endurance events. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 44:344–351
Pingitore A, Lima GP, Mastorci F, Quinones A, Iervasi G, Vassalle C (2015) Exercise and
oxidative stress: potential effects of antioxidant dietary strategies in sports. Nutrition
31:916–922
Rapoport BI (2010) Metabolic factors limiting performance in marathon runners. PLoS Comput
Biol 6:e1000960
Rehrer NJ, van Kemenade M, Meester W, Brouns F, Saris WH (1992) Gastrointestinal complaints
in relation to dietary intake in triathletes. Int J Sport Nutr 2:48–59
Rennie MJ, Bohé J, Smith K, Wackerhage H, Greenhaff P (2006) Branched-chain amino acids as
fuels and anabolic signals in human muscle. J Nutr 136:264S–268S
Rodriguez NR, di Marco NM, Langley S (2009) American college of sports medicine position
stand. Nutrition and athletic performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 41:709–731
Romijn JA, Coyle EF, Sidossis LS, Gastaldelli A, Horowitz JF, Endert E, Wolfe RR (1993)
Regulation of endogenous fat and carbohydrate metabolism in relation to exercise intensity and
duration. Am J Physiol 265:E380–E391
Roy BD, Luttmer K, Bosman MJ, Tarnopolsky MA (2002) The inﬂuence of post-exercise
macronutrient intake on energy balance and protein metabolism in active females participating
in endurance training. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 12:172–188
Sareban M, Zügel D, Koehler K, Hartveg P, Zügel M, Schumann U, Steinacker JM, Treff G (2015)
Carbohydrate Intake in form of gel is associated with increased gastrointestinal distress but not
with performance differences when compared to liquid carbohydrate ingestion during
simulated long-distance triathlon. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
Sawka MN, Burke LM, Eichner ER, Maughan RJ, Montain SJ, Stachenfeld NS (2007) American
College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise andﬂuid replacement. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 39:377–390
Sedlock DA (2008) The latest on carbohydrate loading: a practical approach. Curr Sports Med Rep
7:209–213
Sherman WM, Costill DL, Fink WJ, Miller JM (1981) Effect of exercise-diet manipulation on
muscle glycogen and its subsequent utilization during performance. Int J Sports Med
2:114–118
Sherman WM, Doyle JA, Lamb DR, Strauss RH (1993) Dietary carbohydrate, muscle glycogen,
and exercise performance during 7 d of training. Am J Clin Nutr 57:27–31
Shirreffs SM, Armstrong LE, Cheuvront SN (2004) Fluid and electrolyte needs for preparation and
recovery from training and competition. J Sports Sci 22:57
–63
66 K. Koehler
Sinclair LM, Hinton PS (2005) Prevalence of iron de ﬁciency with and without anemia in
recreationally active men and women. J Am Diet Assoc 105:975–978
Spriet LL (2007) Regulation of substrate use during the marathon. Sports Med 37:332–336
Stellingwerff T (2012) Case study: nutrition and training periodization in three elite marathon
runners. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 22:392–400
Stellingwerff T (2013) Contemporary nutrition approaches to optimize elite marathon perfor-
mance. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 8:573–578
Stuempﬂe KJ, Hoffman MD, Hew-Butler T (2013) Association of gastrointestinal distress in
ultramarathoners with race diet. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 23:103–109
Tarnopolsky M (2004) Protein requirements for endurance athletes. Nutrition 20:662–668
Tarnopolsky MA, Ruby BC (2001) Sex differences in carbohydrate metabolism. Curr Opin Clin
Nutr Metab Care 4:521–526
Tsintzas K, Williams C (1998) Human muscle glycogen metabolism during exercise. Effect of
carbohydrate supplementation. Sports Med 25:7–23
Tsintzas OK, Williams C, Wilson W, Burrin J (1996) Inﬂuence of carbohydrate supplementation
early in exercise on endurance running capacity. Med Sci Sports Exerc 28:1373–1379
van Soeren MH, Graham TE (1998) Effect of caffeine on metabolism, exercise endurance, and
catecholamine responses after withdrawal. J Appl Physiol 85:1493–1501 (1985)
Vanheest JL, Rodgers CD, Mahoney CE, De Souza MJ (2013) Ovarian suppression impairs sport
performance in junior elite female swimmers. Med Sci Sports Exerc
Vella LD, Cameron-Smith D (2010) Alcohol, athletic performance and recovery. Nutrients
2:781–789
Westerterp KR, Meijer GA, Janssen EM, Saris WH, ten Hoor F (1992) Long-term effect of
physical activity on energy balance and body composition. Br J Nutr 68:21–30
Williams C, Brewer J, Walker M (1992) The effect of a high carbohydrate diet on running
performance during a 30-km treadmill time trial. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 65:18–24
World Anti-Doping Agency (2015) The 2015 prohibited list. International Standard (Online).
Available: https://wada-main-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/resources/ﬁles/wada-2015-prohibited-
list-en.pdf. Accessed Nov 2015
World Health Organization (2007) Assessing the iron status of populations (Online). Available:http://
www.who.int/nutrition/publications/micronutrients/anaemia_iron_deﬁciency/9789241596107.
pdf. Accessed Nov 2015
Zouhal H, Groussard C, Minter G, Vincent S, Cretual A, Gratas-Delamarche A, Delamarche P,
Noakes TD (2011) Inverse relationship between percentage body weight change andﬁnishing
time in 643 forty-two-kilometre marathon runners. Br J Sports Med 45:1101–1105
Zourdos MC, Sanchez-Gonzalez MA, Mahoney SE (2015) A brief review: the implications of iron
supplementation for marathon runners on health and performance. J Strength Cond Res
29:559–565
3 Nutrition for Marathon Running 67